# Creating a new layer

Layer skeleton code is generated from the Khronos specification XML, allowing
new layers to be quickly built based on the latest specifications.

The code for a layer is split into two parts, which are generated separately.

* Common code provides the dispatch framework which intercept all entrypoints,
  and then forwards these to an appropriate handler. The common code provides a
  default pass-through handler for each API entrypoint.
* User code provides layer-specific implementations of function intercepts and
  can extend the generated `Device` and `Instance` classes with whatever
  additional stateful persistence is needed to implement the layer.

## Checking out the code

From the directory you want to contain the code, check out the project and all
third-party dependencies:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/ARM-software/libGPUlayers ./
git submodule update --init
```

## Generate the common code

The common code is checked into the repository, and should not need
regenerating unless you need to use a newer version of the specification.

Update the version of the Vulkan specification by updating the git version of
the `khronos/vulkan` submodule.

Once updated, regenerate the common code using the Python script:

```
python3 ./generator/generate_vulkan_common.py
```

## Generate the layer skeleton

To create a new layer, use the Python script to generate a layer driver
skeleton for it. Replace the placeholder "Demo" with your layer name.

```
python3 ./generator/generate_vulkan_layer.py --project-name VkLayerDemo --output layer_demo
```

The Vulkan layer name must start with `VkLayer` and have a title-case name,
e.g. `VkLayerExampleName`.

The output directory name should start with `layer_` and have a snake-case
name, e.g. `layer_example_name`.

The output directory must be in the root directory of the git checkout, making
it a sibling of the `source_common` directory. This ensures that autogenerated
CMake include paths work correctly.

**Note:** The skeleton layer does nothing other than intercept all of the
Vulkan API entry points and forward them to the next layer/driver in the stack.
You must edit the skeleton source code to make it do something useful ...

## Adding custom intercepts to your layer

Custom intercept functions are implemented in your layer source tree. We use
C++ template tag dispatch in the common code to automatically select the
specialized function implemented in the layer code, falling back to the common
default version if no specialization is available.

Instance function intercepts must be declared in a header called
`layer_instance_functions.hpp` in the layer `source` directory.

Device function intercepts must be declared in a header called
`layer_device_functions.hpp` in the layer `source` directory.

The function prototypes for a layer implementation must be templated versions
of the normal Vulkan prototype, with the type `<user_tag>` used for the
template specialization.

```
template <>
VKAPI_ATTR void VKAPI_CALL layer_vkDestroyInstance<user_tag>(
    VkInstance instance,
    const VkAllocationCallbacks* pAllocator);
```

## Build an Android layer

These build instructions require the following tools to be installed and added
to your environment `PATH`:

* CMake
* GNU Make

The Android NDK must also be installed, and the path to the root of the NDK
installation must be stored in your `ANDROID_NDK_HOME` environment variable.

```sh
cd <your_layer>

cmake \
  -B <your_build_dir> \
  -G "Unix Makefiles" \
  -DCMAKE_SYSTEM_NAME=Android \
  -DANDROID_PLATFORM=29 \
  -DANDROID_ABI=arm64-v8a \
  -DANDROID_TOOLCHAIN=clang \
  -DANDROID_STL=c++_static \
  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release \
  -DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE="${ANDROID_NDK_HOME}/build/cmake/android.toolchain.cmake"

cmake --build <your_build_dir>
```

CMake builds are build system agnostic. You can replace GNU Make with another
build system, such as Ninja, if that is preferred.

An Android build script for Linux hosts, `./android_build.sh`, is provided
as a convenience wrapper for the above commands. It is not required to use
this; it is primarily included to provide a one-line build for our CI test
system.

## Build a Linux layer


These build instructions require the following tools to be installed and added
to your environment `PATH`:

* CMake
* GNU Make

```sh
cd <your_layer>

cmake \
  -B <your_build_dir> \
  -G "Unix Makefiles" \
  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release \
  ..

cmake --build <your_build_dir>
```

- - -

_Copyright © 2024-2025, Arm Limited and contributors._
